Overview of current dataset definitions and questons to ask users (#6212)
treeverse/lakeFS: design/open/design-datasets.md

states, and can drive HMS merges and copies.  All metadata is stored on the
HMS; the `lakectl metastore` command calls out to a HMS URI that is supplied
by configuration or by flags.

A Glue or similar metastore is stored off lakeFS.  lakeFS exports "symlinks"
objects that give it direct access to S3.  All important table metadata is
still stored on an external Glue catalog.

### Delta Lake and Delta-diff

Given a path, Delta describes its own schema, so no further catalog is
necessary.  The current lakeFS Delta Lake implementation is unaware of the
list of tables stored in the repository.

Delta diff has no explicit concept of tables because it needs none.  The web
UI activates Delta diff (only) when a folder contains a `_delta_log/`
subfolder.

It will be possible to list all subfolders holding Delta Lake folders by
listing with separator `_delta_log/`.  (A simple API change could add a
"prefixes-only" mode to the lakeFS list-objects API, if needed.)

### Iceberg Catalog

lakeFS Iceberg support uses a catalog to locate Iceberg files.  This allows
it to translate schema to refs.  But the lakeFS Iceberg catalog wraps a

> Spark catalog; it does not store any tables itself.  Currently only
> SparkCatalog is supported, but it is not clear what _other_ catalogs would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hadoop catalog; it does not store any tables itself.  Currently only
HadoopCatalog is supported, but it is not clear what _other_ catalogs would
```
Also I wouldn't say that the Hadoop catalog is supported per se, rather it's `LakeFSCatalog` which behaves like a Hadoop catalog

paths through object keys these definitions exactly support lakeFS ref
semantics: branching out, tagging, ref expressions, and even successfully
merging defines the same table across schemas.

lakeFS Delta Sharing supports two table types:

* **Delta Lake**: These describe their own schema.  A `delta` table needs no
  information beyond a table name and its path.
* **"Hive"**: These are partitioned directories of Parquet or possibly other
  files.  Despite the name, no Hive metastore is involved; rather the lakeFS
  Delta Sharing server defines similar semantics.  A `hive` table needs a
  name and a path, but also a list of partition columns and a schema for all
  fields.  Table schemas are defined using
  [this][delta-sharing-schema-schema] "a subset of Spark SQL's JSON Schema
  representation".  Currently Hive-style tables do not support column ranges
  metadata.

## Analysis

We currently support these 3 ways of defining tables:

* Implicitly, by discovering that a given path holds a table.  This is our
  current Delta Lake and Delta-diff support.
* Externally, by deferring to an external catalog.  This is our metastore

>   support (HMS is the catalog) and our Iceberg support (SparkCatalog is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  support (HMS is the catalog) and our Iceberg support (LakeFSCatalog is the
```

a fully-functional experience, for _some_ catalogs.  Their principal
limitations:

* Risk of fragmentation: If there are many popular external catalogs we will
  need to support many of them.  Different catalogs support different
  use-cases, so we should expect to have to support multiple catalogs.
* Limitations due to the external definition: Because existing catalog
  implementations were designed without lakeFS in mind, we will not be able
  to add lakeFS features to all of them.  For instance the HMS protocol is
  Thrift-based and does not support refs-as-schemas.

#### Possible future features

Support more catalog types.  Each catalog adds implementation effort.

Support catalog wrappers that work with multiple external catalogs.  For
instance, support wrapping additional catalogs under the Iceberg catalog.

### Internal definition

An internal definition should allow us to support _all_ lakeFS features that
systems can handle.  Because it reduces external dependencies, it is
probably the fastest way for us to implement "table" features on top of
lakeFS -- we have seen this in the Iceberg catalog wrapper which is barely

> more than an internal definition, and in the lakeFS Delta Sharing server.

Reviewer: not sure that I understand it... How is the Iceberg catalog wrapper an internal definition?

`lakectl` allows updating the table stored on the HMS to match branch
states, and can drive HMS merges and copies.  All metadata is stored on the
HMS; the `lakectl metastore` command calls out to a HMS URI that is supplied
by configuration or by flags.

A Glue or similar metastore is stored off lakeFS.  lakeFS exports "symlinks"
objects that give it direct access to S3.  All important table metadata is
still stored on an external Glue catalog.

### Delta Lake and Delta-diff

Given a path, Delta describes its own schema, so no further catalog is
necessary.  The current lakeFS Delta Lake implementation is unaware of the
list of tables stored in the repository.

Delta diff has no explicit concept of tables because it needs none.  The web
UI activates Delta diff (only) when a folder contains a `_delta_log/`
subfolder.

It will be possible to list all subfolders holding Delta Lake folders by
listing with separator `_delta_log/`.  (A simple API change could add a
"prefixes-only" mode to the lakeFS list-objects API, if needed.)

### Iceberg Catalog

lakeFS Iceberg support is a catalog that locates Iceberg files.  This allows

> it to translate schema to refs.  lakeFS Iceberg catalog is a Hadoop catalog:
> it supports access through paths.  In a sense, it does not support a true
> catalog concept of "all tables".
> 
> Currently only HadoopCatalog is supported, but it is not clear what _other_
> catalogs would work.

Reviewer: This still sounds a bit inaccurate:
```suggestion
it to translate schema to refs.  lakeFS Iceberg catalog is an Iceberg HadoopCatalog wrapper:
it supports access through paths.  In a sense, it does not support a true
catalog concept of "all tables".

Currently only HadoopCatalog-like behavior is supported, but it is not clear what _other_
catalogs would work.
```

* Risk of fragmentation: If there are many popular external catalogs we will
  need to support many of them.  Different catalogs support different
  use-cases, so we should expect to have to support multiple catalogs.
* Limitations due to the external definition: Because existing catalog
  implementations were designed without lakeFS in mind, we will not be able
  to add lakeFS features to all of them.  For instance the HMS protocol is
  Thrift-based and does not support refs-as-schemas.

Iceberg support might become an external definition once it supports
deferring to an external catalog.  It does not yet support wrapping an
external catalog because of these risks.

#### Possible future features

Support more catalog types.  Each catalog adds implementation effort.

Support catalog wrappers that work with multiple external catalogs.  For
instance, wrapping additional catalogs under the Iceberg catalog, making it
an external definition.

### Internal definition

An internal definition should allow us to support _all_ lakeFS features that
systems can handle.  Because it reduces external dependencies, it is
probably the _fastest_ way for us to implement "table" features on top of

> lakeFS -- we have seen this in the lakeFS Delta Sharing server.  The Iceberg

Reviewer: I'm still not sure that the Iceberg catalog is considered internal. I agree that the catalog's files are stored using lakeFS, yet the implementation is completely external to lakeFS...

Author: As a catalog, we are internal: we "serve" this catalog.  The implementation leverages another implementation.  But mapping of names to locations goes through our catalog.  (It doesn't do much with it, but it could.)
